Kai Rowlands

Numerical Differentiation & Numerical Integration

This program contains two files: main.cpp and class.cpp. To begin compile and execute the code with the following commands: "g++ main.cpp -o main" and "./main".

The goal of this program is to use object-oriented programming to compute numerical derivatives and numerical integrals of functions of a single variable. Consider the functions f(x) = x^3 and g(x) = sin(5x)cos(2x) and suppose we wish to compute the derivative and antiderivative of each function using numerical methods. (The graph of the antiderivative of g, G, is very cool looking, I suggest graphing it on Desmos; you can find G on line 38 in main.cpp.) To do so we make use of the forward difference, the backward difference, and the central difference for numerical derivatives and the left Riemann sum, the right Riemann sum, the midpoint rule, the trapezoidal rule, and Simpson's rule for numerical integration. This program also measures the error of each method by computing the absolute value of the difference between the numerical method and the actual value of the derivative of the function evaluated at a point and the value of the definite integral defined on some interval of the real line. Something of interest to me is the application of these numerical methods to solve differential equations. Differential equations is a very expansive topic in mathematics, in fact, some partial differential equations cannot be solved generally and need to be solved using numerical methods. On Wikipedia I just discovered a numerical method for solving ordinary differential equations called the Runge-Kutta method which uses these numerical integration methods. In the future I hope to write a program which expands on this one that is used to solve ordinary differential equations.

There is room for personalization within this program, for example, this program computes the numerical derivatives at the point x = 0.123. However, you can change this value to whichever value you would like. Further, you can compute these numerical methods on whichever function you would like. Just be aware that you will need to compute the derivative and antiderivative of that new function and input those functions into the program. Finally you can personalize the spacing between the points for the numerical derivatives and the number of rectangles in the numerical integrals. In lines 56 and 72 in main.cpp there are two for loops which start at 1 and end at 7, for greater accuracy you can increase this number.
